RFC 00010 multi gateway shared DNS (#70)
Kuadrant/architecture: rfcs/0008-distributed-dns.md

- Start Date: 2024-01-17
- RFC PR: [Kuadrant/architecture#0008](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/pull/55)
- Issue tracking: [Kuadrant/architecture#0008](https://github.com/Kuadrant/architecture/issues/56)

# Terminology

- OCM: [Open Cluster Management](https://open-cluster-management.io/)
- Dead End Records: Records that target a Kuadrant defined CNAME that no longer exists

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Enable the DNS Operator to manage DNS for one or more hostnames across one or more clusters.  Remove the requirement for a central OCM based "hub" cluster or multi-cluster control plane in order to enable multi-cluster DNS.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The DNS operator has limited functionality for a single cluster, and none for multiple clusters without leveraging OCM. Having the DNS operator capable of supporting the full feature set of DNSPolicy in these situations significantly eases on-boarding users to leveraging `DNSPolicy` across both single and multi-cluster deployments and gives a single layer to work against rather than defining resources in hubs and then understanding how to distribute them across spoke clusters.

# Diagrams

> [diagrams]: #diagrams

Reviewer: Are there supposed to be diagrams here?

Author: being updated

## Switching strategy (IE from LoadBalanced to Simple or the other way)
The DNSPolicy offers 2 strategies 
1) Simple (one A record multiple values)
2) LoadBalanced (leverages CNAMES and A records to provide advanced DNS based routing to be used (example GEO and Weighted) )

The strategy field will be immutable once set. To migrate from one strategy to the other you must first delete the existing policy and recreate it with a new strategy. In a multi-cluster environment, this can mean you have a period of time where 2 different strategies are set (simple on one and load balanced on another). The controller will mitigate against this in the following way. When attempting to update the remote zone, it first does a read. If it spots existing records in that zone that correlate with a different strategy, it will not write its own records but will flag this as an error state in the status. So the records will remain in the original strategy until all policies for that listener host match (more in this below).

## Orphan Mitigation

> It is possible for an orphan set of records to be created if for example a cluster is removed and the controller on that cluster is not given time to clean up. This is not something we currently mitigate against directly in the controller. However, you can define health checks tht would remove these orphans from the DNS response. Additionally, there is future work that leverages a "heart beat" that should allow each alive controller to see and remove a dead controllers records within a given criteria.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible for an orphan set of records to be created if for example a cluster is removed and the controller on that cluster is not given time to clean up. This is not something we currently mitigate against directly in the controller. However, you can define health checks that would remove these orphans from the DNS response. Additionally, there is future work that leverages a "heart beat" that should allow each alive controller to see and remove a dead controllers records within a given criteria.
```

[AWS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/Route53/latest/DeveloperGuide/DNS-failover.html) (well understood)
[Google DNS](https://cloud.google.com/DNS/docs/zones/manage-routing-policies#before_you_begin)
[Azure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/traffic-manager/traffic-manager-monitoring)

## OCM / ACM
This is very similar, with the caveat that the "cluster" is the hub cluster for this OCM and that the gateway will be a Kuadrant gatewayClass. You can think about this setup as "single cluster" with a gateway that has multiple addresses. It will continue to work with these changes. 

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## General Logic Overview

### Kuadrant Operator

The general flow in the Kuadrant operator follows a single path, where it will always output a valid DNSRecord, which specifies everything needed for the listener host of a given gateway on the cluster, and is unaware of the concept of distributed DNS. The core logic for doing this already exists.

### DNS Operator / controller

> We will update the DNS Operator to leverage the external DNS provider logic (IE effectively use it as a library) and layer our multi-cluster changes ontop of this logic. Our hope is to keep what we are doing as compatible with external DNS as possible so that we can contribute / propose changes to external-dsn

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will update the DNS Operator to leverage the external DNS provider logic (IE effectively use it as a library) and layer our multi-cluster changes on top of this logic. Our hope is to keep what we are doing as compatible with external DNS as possible so that we can contribute / propose changes to external-dns
```

> The DNSRecord created by the Kuadrant operator is reconciled by the DNSRecord controller as part of the DNS Operator component (the operator and controller terms can be used interchangeably). In the event of a change to the endpoints in the DNSRecord resource (including deletion and creation of the resource), the DNSRecord controller will first pull down the relevant records for that DNS name from the provider and store them in the DNSRecord status. Next it will update the affected endpoints in that record set and validate the record set has no "dead ends" before writing the changes back to the DNS Provider's zone. Once the remote write is successful, it will then re-queue the DNSRecord for validation. The validation will be the same validation as previously done before the write. It will pull the zone and ensure that the endpoints from its own local DSNRecord are reflected correctly. If the validation is successful, the controller will mark this in the status of the DNSRecord and will re-queue the validation for ~15 (example) minutes later (a stable state verification). If validation is unsuccessful, it will re-queue the DNSRecord for validation rapidly (5 seconds for example). With each re-queue after an unsuccessful validation, it will add a random amount of "jitter" time to increase the chance it moves out of sync with any other actors. Each time it re-queues, it will mark this in the status (see below). At any point, if there is a change to the on-cluster DNSRecord, this back off and validation will be reset and started again.  

Reviewer: What's the thinking behind adding the list of zone endpoints to the status? Is that just for visibility i.e. this list should eventually be the same on all DNSRecord instances giving you a full view of the world on any cluster?

Author: Yes I think it is useful to be able to see what is the state that the controller is working from and allow comparision with controllers in other clusters

> As each controller is responsible for part of the overall DNS record set for a given DNS name in a shared zones and potentially as values in a shared record and as neither the zone nor records are lockable, there will be scenarios where one controller overwrites some part of a zone/record with a stale view. This can happen if two or more controllers attempt to update the remote zone at the same time as each controller may have read the zone before another clusters has executed it's write allowing the zone to be updated without the knowledge of other actors that have also done a read. During this type of timing clash, effectively the last controller to write will have its changes stored. When it does validation, its changes will still be present and it will revert to a stable cycle. The other controllers involved, will see their changes missing in the remote zone during their validation check and so will pull and update the zone again (setting a new validation with a random jitter applied to increase the chances they don't clash again). Again the last controller to write will see its changes. So with this we can predict a worst case scenario of (num clashing controllers * (validation_loop + jitter)). However with adding in the jitter, it is likely that this will be a shorter period of time as multiple clusters will fall out of sync and should resolve their state within the min-max requeue interval rather than only ever one at a time. 

Reviewer: Might be worth noting here that some DNS providers, depending on how they work, also try and mitigate against this kind of scenarios. Google for instance requires that during any update you first delete the existing record and you must do this by providing the exact contents of that record. In this case if it was out of date it would error and fall fall out of the reconcile loop and try again.

We still however need to do what is described here for cases where the provider does not do this.

> As each controller is responsible for part of the overall DNS record set for a given DNS name in a shared zones and potentially as values in a shared record and as neither the zone nor records are lockable, there will be scenarios where one controller overwrites some part of a zone/record with a stale view. This can happen if two or more controllers attempt to update the remote zone at the same time as each controller may have read the zone before another clusters has executed it's write allowing the zone to be updated without the knowledge of other actors that have also done a read. During this type of timing clash, effectively the last controller to write will have its changes stored. When it does validation, its changes will still be present and it will revert to a stable cycle. The other controllers involved, will see their changes missing in the remote zone during their validation check and so will pull and update the zone again (setting a new validation with a random jitter applied to increase the chances they don't clash again). Again the last controller to write will see its changes. So with this we can predict a worst case scenario of (num clashing controllers * (validation_loop + jitter)). However with adding in the jitter, it is likely that this will be a shorter period of time as multiple clusters will fall out of sync and should resolve their state within the min-max requeue interval rather than only ever one at a time. 

Author: right this assumes a converged state is possible. It will work if there is a common state they are all trying to reach. Please see conflict detection below for how we will handle situations where it is clear we are not reaching that state

> As each controller is responsible for part of the overall DNS record set for a given DNS name in a shared zones and potentially as values in a shared record and as neither the zone nor records are lockable, there will be scenarios where one controller overwrites some part of a zone/record with a stale view. This can happen if two or more controllers attempt to update the remote zone at the same time as each controller may have read the zone before another clusters has executed it's write allowing the zone to be updated without the knowledge of other actors that have also done a read. During this type of timing clash, effectively the last controller to write will have its changes stored. When it does validation, its changes will still be present and it will revert to a stable cycle. The other controllers involved, will see their changes missing in the remote zone during their validation check and so will pull and update the zone again (setting a new validation with a random jitter applied to increase the chances they don't clash again). Again the last controller to write will see its changes. So with this we can predict a worst case scenario of (num clashing controllers * (validation_loop + jitter)). However with adding in the jitter, it is likely that this will be a shorter period of time as multiple clusters will fall out of sync and should resolve their state within the min-max requeue interval rather than only ever one at a time. 

Author: No not all records in zone just any shared records (IE multiple values)

The cluster will need a deterministic manner to generate an ID that is unique enough to not clash with other clusterIDs, that can be regenerated if ever required.

This clusterID is used to identify which A/CNAME records were created by which cluster/controller

The suggestion [here](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-sig-architecture/c/mVGobfD4TpY/m/nkdbkX1iBwAJ) is to use the UID of the `kube-system` namespace, as this [cannot be deleted easily](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-sig-architecture/c/mVGobfD4TpY/m/lR4SnaqpAAAJ) - so is practically speaking indelible.

We can take the UID of that namespace and apply a hashing algorithm to result in 6-7 character code which can be used as the clusterID for the local cluster.

#### Ensure local records are accurate

When the local DNSRecord is updated, the DNS Operator will ensure those values are present in the zone by interacting directly with the DNS Provider. As mentioned above it will pull the zone, merge in its changes and write back the result before requeuing the resource for validation. With each requeuing it will add a random amount of time to attempt to fall out sync with any conflicting controllers.

#### Cleanup

> When a DNS Policy is marked for deletion the kuadrant operator will delete all relevant kuadrantRecords.

Author: yes thanks that was left over

## Switching strategy (IE from LoadBalanced to Simple or the other way)
The DNSPolicy offers 2 strategies 
1) Simple (one A record multiple values)
2) LoadBalanced (leverages CNAMES and A records to provide advanced DNS based routing to be used (example GEO and Weighted) )

The strategy field will be immutable once set. To migrate from one strategy to the other you must first delete the existing policy and recreate it with a new strategy. In a multi-cluster environment, this can mean you have a period of time where 2 different strategies are set (simple on one and load balanced on another). The controller will mitigate against this in the following way. When attempting to update the remote zone, it first does a read. If it spots existing records in that zone that correlate with a different strategy, it will not write its own records but will flag this as an error state in the status. So the records will remain in the original strategy until all policies for that listener host match (more in this below).

## Orphan Mitigation

> It is possible for an orphan set of records to be created if for example a cluster is removed and the controller on that cluster is not given time to clean up. This is not something we currently mitigate against directly in the controller. However, you can define health checks that would remove these orphans from the DNS response. Additionally, there is future work that leverages a "heart beat" that should allow each alive controller to see and remove a dead controllers records within a given criteria.

Reviewer 2: `However, you can define health checks that would remove these orphans from the DNS response.` -> In the end this may lead to serving of orphaned ip instead of NXDOMAIN if all of the other DNSPolicies from other clusters are removed (or how does the dns provider handle situations when there are no healthy endpoints left?).

Author: it returns all IPs if no healthy IPs left

Reviewer 2: ok, then if the orphan is the latest record it gets served (instead of NXDOMAIN) despite health checks, right?

Reviewer 2: another fact that arises from not-mitigating orphans is that the strategy can't be changed for this hostname if orphan is not manually removed. (actually this may be a feature)

### Health Checks
The health checks provided by the various DNS Providers will be used AWS will be the only one implemented initially as part of this RFC as we have done it before. For the others we may choose to cover this area in more detail in a subsequent RFC and they may be limited to having infra within that provider.

[AWS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/Route53/latest/DeveloperGuide/DNS-failover.html) (well understood)
[Google DNS](https://cloud.google.com/DNS/docs/zones/manage-routing-policies#before_you_begin)
[Azure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/traffic-manager/traffic-manager-monitoring)

## OCM / ACM
This is very similar, with the caveat that the "cluster" is the hub cluster for this OCM and that the gateway will be a Kuadrant gatewayClass. You can think about this setup as "single cluster" with a gateway that has multiple addresses. It will continue to work with these changes. 

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## General Logic Overview

### Kuadrant Operator

> The general flow in the Kuadrant operator follows a single path, where it will always output a valid DNSRecord, which specifies everything needed for the listener host of a given gateway on the cluster, and is unaware of the concept of distributed DNS. The core logic for doing this already exists.

Reviewer 2: what if DNSRecord object created from DNSPolicy is manipulated directly? Does kuadrant-operator reconcile it back to the desired state? if not and "multicluster is active" I think the dns-operator can easily be confused as the record structure may not be compliant with either strategy.

Author: Yes this will be part of reconciliation. IE watch the DNSRecord and bring back to the right state

There are several changes required in this component:

#### Generate a ClusterID

The cluster will need a deterministic manner to generate an ID that is unique enough to not clash with other clusterIDs, that can be regenerated if ever required.

This clusterID is used to identify which A/CNAME records were created by which cluster/controller. This is done via the registry implementation in external-dns. Initially we will use the TXT registry, but in the future we will also want to offer a different form of storage for the registry .

The suggestion [here](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-sig-architecture/c/mVGobfD4TpY/m/nkdbkX1iBwAJ) is to use the UID of the `kube-system` namespace, as this [cannot be deleted easily](https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-sig-architecture/c/mVGobfD4TpY/m/lR4SnaqpAAAJ) - so is practically speaking indelible.

We can take the UID of that namespace and apply a hashing algorithm to result in 6-7 character code which can be used as the clusterID for the local cluster.

#### Ensure local records are accurate

> When the local DNSRecord is updated, the DNS Operator will ensure those values are present in the zone by interacting directly with the DNS Provider. As mentioned above it will pull the zone, merge in its changes and write back the result before requeuing the resource for validation. With each requeuing it will add a random amount of time to attempt to fall out sync with any conflicting controllers.

Author: There is always a requeue. It is either a short requeue or a long requeue.

> When the local DNSRecord is updated, the DNS Operator will ensure those values are present in the zone by interacting directly with the DNS Provider. As mentioned above it will pull the zone, merge in its changes and write back the result before requeuing the resource for validation. With each requeuing it will add a random amount of time to attempt to fall out sync with any conflicting controllers.

Author: I have also updated this now to call out using external-dns plan

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## General Logic Overview

### Kuadrant Operator

The general flow in the Kuadrant operator follows a single path, where it will always output a valid DNSRecord, which specifies everything needed for the listener host of a given gateway on the cluster, and is unaware of the concept of distributed DNS. The core logic for doing this already exists.

### DNS Operator / controller

We will update the DNS Operator to leverage the external DNS provider logic (IE effectively use it as a library) and layer our multi-cluster changes on top of this logic. Our hope is to keep what we are doing as compatible with external DNS as possible so that we can contribute / propose changes to external-dns. As part of this we will leverage the existing `plan` structure and logic that is responsible for "planning" and executing the required changes to a remote DNS zone. It is our intention to modify the plan code in order to allow for a shared host name reconciled across multiple clusters.

> The DNSRecord created by the Kuadrant operator is reconciled by the DNSRecord controller as part of the DNS Operator component (the operator and controller terms can be used interchangeably). In the event of a change to the endpoints in the DNSRecord resource (including deletion and creation of the resource), the DNSRecord controller will first pull down the relevant records for that DNS name from the provider and store them in the DNSRecord status. Next via the external-dns plan, it will update the affected endpoints in that record set and validate the record set has no "dead ends" before writing the changes back to the DNS Provider's zone. Once the remote write is successful, it will then re-queue the DNSRecord for validation. The validation will be the same validation as previously done before the write. It will build a plan and if the plan based on the remote zone. If the plan is empty of changes the validation is successful. The controller will then mark this in the status of the DNSRecord and will re-queue the validation for ~15 (example) minutes later (a stable state verification). If validation is unsuccessful, it will re-queue the DNSRecord for validation rapidly (5 seconds for example). With each re-queue after an unsuccessful validation, it will add a random amount of "jitter" time to increase the chance it moves out of sync with any other actors. Each time it re-queues, it will mark this in the status (see below). At any point, if there is a change to the on-cluster DNSRecord, this back off and validation will be reset and started again.  

Reviewer 2: `It will build a plan and if the plan based on the remote zone.` what??

Author: hmm obviously got distracted when writing that :) Will update to make more sense

### Configuration Updates
There will be a new configuration option that can be applied as runtime argument (to allow us emergency configuration rescue in case of an unexpected issue) to the kuadrant-operator:
- `clusterID`  (see below for how this is used)
  - When absent, this is generated in code (more information below). A unique string to identify this cluster apart from all other clusters.

### Changes to DNS Policy reconciler (kuadrant operator)

This will primarily need to be made aware that it will need to propagate the DNS Policy health check block into any DNS Records that it creates or updates using the provider specific fields.

> It will also need to update the format of the records in the DNSRecord it creates. We will drop the use of a guid from the DNS name and instead simple use a prefix (klb) for example. This will mean multiple gateways with the same or different names can now update the record set if their gateway shares a listener with a common host name. 

Reviewer: Also needs to add the `clusterID` as an annotation/label to any DNSRecords it creates. Should we add that here?

Reviewer: Starting to wonder if `ownerID` shouldn't just be added as an optional field to the  DNSRecord.Spec since it, along with "rootHost", are going to be important when it comes to multicluster.

Author: might avoid specifics of how it is passed for now

Whenever a deleted DNSRecord is reconciled by the DNS Operator, it will remove any relevant records from the DNS Provider (i.e. any record identified by the clusterID for the deleted host.

#### Prune dead ends from DNS Records

If a DNSRecord is deleting, there is the potential that we are leaving behind a dead end, which will need to be recursively cleaned until none remain.

What is a dead end? If a CNAME exists whose value is a record that does not exist, this CNAME will not resolve.

The controller will need to work through the DNS Record and ensure that from hostname to A (or external CNAME) records is structurally sound and that any dead ends are removed, to do this, the DNS Operator will need to first read what is published in the provider zone.

#### Removing the finalizer from DNSRecord

When a DNSRecord is reconciled, the DNS Operator should apply a finalizer to it.

When a DNSRecord is being removed, the following must be successfully completed before the finalizer can be removed:
- Remove the local clusters records and targets from the relevant zone
- Perform a prune on the relevant root host

> - Apply the results of the prune to the DNS Provider

Reviewer 2: also delete healthchecks if needed (how to detect it - no records left?)

Author: This is a good point. @philbrookes any thoughts on when we delete a health check? I would think it is part of the dead end check? IE if there is no endpoints for a given rootHost then remove?

Author: had to change the rfc number which is why this shows as outdated
